## Il campo magnetico terrestre

> In fact, the mechanism that produces Earth's magnetic field is only vaguely understood.

[HR, paragrafo 32-4 MAGNETS]

> Earth's Magnetic Field: Earth's magnetic field is generated in the outer core: 
> convective circulation within the conductive liquid iron and nickel outer core, 
> spiraling in line with Earth’s rotational axis, induces the magnetic field
> of our planet through what is sometimes called a geodynamo.
> Most geophysicists think that for such a geodynamo to work, the presence of an 
> initial weak magnetic field was needed, most likely coming from the Sun. 
 
[App, capitolo 13]

> (b) Origin of the main field. Spherical harmonic 
> analysis of the observed magnetic field shows that 
> over 99% is due to sources inside the Earth. The 
> present theory is that the main field is caused by 
> convection currents of conducting material circulating 
> in the liquid outer core (which extends from 
> depths of 2,800 to 5,000 km). The Earth's core is 
> assumed to be a mixture of iron and nickel, both 
> good electrical conductors. The magnetic source is 
> thought to be a self-excited dynamo in which highly 
> conductive fluid moves in a complex manner caused 
> by convection. Paleomagnetic data show that the 
> magnetic field has always been roughly along the 
> Earth's spin axis, implying that the convective motion 
> is coupled to the Earth's spin. Recent exploration 
> of the magnetic fields of other planets and 
> their satellites provide fascinating comparisons with 
> the Earth's field.

[Telford, paragrafo 3.3.2 The Main Field]

> In fact, the way in which the Earth's magnetic field is generated 
> is only qualitatively understood. 
 
[Turcotte-2nd, paragrafo 1.8 Paleomagnetism and the Motion of the Plates] e anche
[Turcotte-3rd, paragrafo 1.8 Paleomagnetism and the Motion of the Plates]

> It is *thought* to be caused by convection currents circulating 
> conducting metallic fluids in the outer core, a sort of self-exciting dynamo.

[Chapman, capitolo 8]

> The generation of a global magnetic field requires a rotating, electrically conducting
> shell within a planet as well as fluid motion, i.e. convection, within that shell.
> In the terrestrial planets and satellites this region is believed to be the iron-rich
> fluid core.

[Rossi, paragrafo 10.3.1 Dynamo Generation]

> the field is regarded as 
> the product of electrical currents generated by motion (a sort of
> self-sustaining dynamo) within the fluid outer core.

[TY, capitolo 2]

> The present magnetic field could not be a remnant of an ancient process, a dynamo continuously
> operating is necessary. Briefly this dynamo can be assumed to operate through a distortion 
> and amplification of an initial magnetic field due to a magnetohydrodynamic
> interaction with the motions of the plasma constituting the fluid Earth's core. 
> The field so generated decays with time, owing to ohmic dissipation in the conductor. 
> For its maintenance it is then necessary to hypothesize its continuous regeneration 
> to the detriment of some other forms of energy.

[Lanza, paragrafo 1.4 Essentials on the Origin of the Earth's Magnetic Field]

> Put starkly, there are just two possibilities for the
> occurrence of any magnetic field observed in an astrophysical body: 
> either it is a slowly decaying "fossil field,"
> trapped in the body at its formation, or, alternatively, 
> it is maintained by the inductive motions of the
> plasma within the body. The latter process is known
> as a *magnetohydrodynamic dynamo*.

[PCAM, IV.29 Magnetohydrodynamics]

> According to the dynamo hypothesis motions within
> the outer liquid-iron core of the Earth can amplify
> a magnetic field from arbitrarily small amplitudes and
> sustain it at the observed finite strength against Ohmic dissipation.

[Gupta, GEOMAGNETIC FIELD, THEORY]

> Perché la dinamo di autoeccitazione possa funzionare
>  devono essere soddisfatte due condizioni:
>  - deve esserci un campo magnetico esterno all'inizio 
>  perché il processo possa innescarsi;
>  - il disco deve sempre essere mantenuto in rotazione
>  da forze esterne altrimenti viene rallentato 
>  e quindi fermato da forze elettriche.
>  
>  Queste due condizioni sembra proprio che siano 
>  soddisfatte nel caso della Terra e del suo campo
>  magnetico:
>  - il campo magnetico iniziale che ha innescato
>  il processo di autoeccitazione sembra sia stato
>  quello solare;
>  - l'energia cinetica necessaria ai moti convettivi 
>  nel nucleo esterno è garantita dall'energia
>  termica e dalla rotazione terrestre; i complessi
>  movimenti del materiale conduttore nel nucleo
>  esterno sarebbero i responsabili delle 
>  caratteristiche e delle variazioni secolari del campo.

[Bosellini]

> Scientists consider it more likely that the true source of the Earth's
> magnetic field is convection currents in the Earth's core. Charged ions or electrons
> circulating in the liquid interior could produce a magnetic field just as a current loop
> does. There is also strong evidence that the magnitude of a planet's magnetic field is
> related to the planet's rate of rotation. For example, Jupiter rotates faster than the
> Earth, and space probes indicate that Jupiter's magnetic field is stronger than ours.
> Venus, on the other hand, rotates more slowly than the Earth, and its magnetic field is
> found to be weaker. Investigation into the cause of the Earth's magnetism is ongoing.

[Serway, paragrafo 30.9 The Magnetic Field of the Earth]

> Chi scrive si è sempre trovato a disagio di fronte alle richieste
> di una spiegazione sull'origine del campo magnetico
> terrestre: o si cerca di cavarsela con poche parole ("si tratta di correnti
> elettriche indotte nell'interno della Terra") che possono forse 
> accontentare chi non si occupa in modo particolare di problemi scientifici
> ma non possono soddisfare un fisico, oppure ci si sente obbligati a
> tentare faticosamente di approfondire, sia per capirli personalmente
> che per poterli poi spiegare agli altri, argomenti e ragionamenti che
> sono in realtà accessibili solo a un fisico teorico ben preparato. 
> Apparentemente non esiste una via di mezzo, come del resto in molti altri
> campi della fisica contemporanea.

[Molina]

> Alcune ipotesi e teorie, tra le quali alcune piuttosto recenti sono
> abbastanza soddisfacenti, inducono a ricercare le cause del magnetismo
> terrestre nei fenomeni del nucleo terrestre fluido ove per effetto
> dinamo si produrrebbero delle intense correnti elettriche da cui
> deriverebbe anche il campo magnetico che si ossserva in superficie
> ed intorno alla Terra.

[Giorgi]

> Why
> does the Earth produce such a magnetic field? Recall that the
> Earth's outer core consists of molten iron alloy, which constantly
> undergoes convective flow due to variations in density that
> develop in it (see Box 2.3). As physics textbooks explain, iron is
> an electrical conductor, and flow of a conductor in the presence
> of a magnetic field generates an electric current. This current,
> in turn, maintains the magnetic field. Put in the terminology
> of physics, the outer core behaves like a _self-sustaining dynamo_.

[Marshak, paragrafo 3.4 Paleomagnetism - Proving Continental Drift and Seafloor Spreading]

> A popular model is that of the self-exciting
> dynamo: A conductor rotating in a magnetic
> field creates an electron flow. If the flow passes
> through a coil, the coih itself creates a magnetic
> field that keeps the flow moving as long as
> the conductor keeps rotating. Well, tbe Earth
> rotates. Tbe core is conducting, but probably
> more here and less there because of temperature and/or compositional inhomogeneities.
> The more conducting portions could act as
> coils by funneling the electron flow. Although
> we may bave here the ingredients for the creation of a magnetic field, we still do not know
> exactly how it works.

[Emiliani, p.233]

### Bibliografia
[HR]
Jearl WALKER,
_Fundamentals of Physics Halliday & Resnick_,
Previously sold as the 10th Edition,
Extended,
Wiley, 2018.

[App]
Darrel HESS,
_McKnight's physical geography: a landscape appreciation_,
11th Edition,
Pearson Education, 2014.

[Telford]
W.M. TELFORD, L.P. GELDART, R. E. SHERIFF,
_Applied Geophysics_,
Second Edition,
Cambridge University Press, 1990.

[Turcotte-2nd]
Donald L. TURCOTTE, Gerald SCHUBERT,
_Geodynamics_,
Second Edition,
Cambridge University Press, 2002.

[Turcotte-3rd]
Donald L. TURCOTTE, Gerald SCHUBERT,
_Geodynamics_,
Third Edition,
Cambridge University Press, 2014.

[Chapman]
Richard E. CHAPMAN,
_Physics for Geologists_,
Second Edition,
Routledge, 2002.

[Rossi]
Angelo Pio ROSSI, Stephan VAN GASSELT,
_Planetary Geology_,
Springer 2018.

[TY]
David ROTHERY,
_Geology: A Complete Introduction_,
Hodder Education, 2015.

[Lanza]
Roberto LANZA, Antonio MELONI,
_The Earth's Magnetism: An Introduction for Geologists_,
Springer, 2006.

[PCAM]
Nicholas J. HIGHAM,
_The Princeton Companion to Applied Mathematics_,
Princeton University Press, 2015.

[Gupta]
Harsh K. GUPTA,
_Encyclopedia of solid Earth geophysics_,
Springer, 2011.

[Bosellini]
Alfonso BOSELLINI,
_Le scienze della Terra - Tettonica delle placche e storia geologica dell'Italia_,
Italo Bovolenta editore, 2013.

[Serway]
Raymond A. SERWAY, John W. JEWETT,
_Physics for Scientists and Engineers_,
6th Edition,
Thomson Brooks/Cole, 2004.

[Molina]
Franco MOLINA,
_IL CAMPO GEOMAGNETICO_
Annals of Geophysics. 1972. Vol. 25, no. 3 Sup.

[Giorgi]
Maurizio GIORGI,
_Il campo magnetico terrestre_,
_L'agenda nautica 1972_,
Istituto Idrografico della Marina, 1972.

[Marshak]
Stephen MARSHAK,
_EARTH PORTRAIT OF A PLANET_,
W. W. NORTON & COMPANY, 2019

[Emiliani]
Cesare EMILIANI,
_Planet
Earth:
Cosmology, geology and
the evolution of life
and environment_
Cambridge University Press, 1992

https://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/campo-geomagnetico_%28Enciclopedia-della-Scienza-e-della-Tecnica%29/

https://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/magnetismo-terrestre_%28Enciclopedia-della-Scienza-e-della-Tecnica%29/



